- No, I don't think I've ever met anyone, actually,
from the skull.
- Okay, well why would you, we're all, you know,
JavaScript developers, so.
- Filthy JavaScript developers.
(laughing)
(upbeat music)
- I would like to get out of this call
and understand what is full stack.
Like, what does that actually mean?
Maybe everyone else on the call knows,
but I'm more confused than ever.
And mostly from Twitter.
I think I thought I knew what it meant,
but I think everyone probably has different takes on it.
And maybe it's just a dumb word
or a dumb term that we don't need.
- And just to set some context,
the reason we're even doing this is,
so last we, what's his username?
WebdevCody, he was trying out Clarabel,
and his initial reaction was like,
ah, there's so much stuff here.
Like, why there's so much stuff that feels bloated, you know?
Is it really overwhelming?
And Taylor, quote, tweet it, adding some context,
which is, well, you know,
we focus a lot on backend needs
and backend needs a lot of stuff.
Doing stuff asynchronously, job processing,
queues, like, everything that you find
in any like moderately complex app.
And there's a whole bunch of discussion around.
- Mailers, roles on users.
- Yeah.
- Middleware, yeah.
- And in that tweet, I didn't say that I contrasted it
with things like Next.js and Remix,
where it has almost none of that.
And they focus in a completely different area.
And the claim was those aren't full stack
because it's missing these things that are,
like you said, like every application
eventually ends up having some of those.
- Yeah, I think that makes sense.
Although I'm willing to actually concede
that I think those things are full stack
in some sense of the word.
And it's maybe better to talk about Laraval and Rails
as like a different word, like batteries included
or some other term, you know, that is more than full stack.
- I think the default is what Rails and help me out.
How do you pronounce the name of your framework?
- I say Laraval.
Some people say Laraval.
Some people say Larval.
Larval, larval, like a thing coming out of an egg
or something or an insect.
- Taylor, Tyler, what else is that?
(all laughing)
- You can butcher everything.
- Okay, so you say Laraval.
- Yeah, that's how I say it.
- Larval, okay.
That's the best pronunciation.
- I feel like you get to decide, Taylor, how it's said.
- Yeah, you can just make everyone do what you want.
- I mean, to do?
- Yeah, our framework is called "Remeeks."
It's not...
(all laughing)
But everyone says it wrong.
Even though it's that Elon Musk calls it Tesla
with like a Z Tesla.
- Oh yeah, that's funny.
Nobody else does that.
I think the default definition of full stack
is basically what Rails and Laraval are.
Like, I don't think that should change
and they should have a new name.
Like, we're the weirdos coming in
and being like, "Hey, I'm running JavaScript
"on the server, it's full stack."
- I think historically it was like Rails, for example,
was full stack and something like Sinatra,
people called like a micro framework.
- Yeah.
- And those were sort of the two distinctions.
But now, like, I do think the word full stack
has kind of changed a little bit in the JavaScript world
to mean just the ability to run code on the server
or the client.
- Which, like, I think that's not wrong.
I don't think it's totally wrong.
It's just different than how it used to be.
- Yeah, so I'll give you a little background
on why I used the term on the remix website
when we first launched.
And honestly, this last week has been kind of funny
because internally on the remix team
we're like arguing about, is it actually full stack?
But my personal definition,
this isn't like the remix team
and as much as people like to think that Michael and I
are the same person, we're not.
And that's where the magic happens, right?
If you just agreed on everything,
you'd probably end up like selling coffee
through a terminal and requiring people to do their IDRSA key
to buy something.
- We are all very aligned on that.
(laughing)
- No, my definition of full stack is,
you can run code on both sides.
Actually, I have two things I want to say right off the bat.
First of all, butcher box.
I think Taylor and I know this about butcher box.
I don't know if anybody else does.
- I'm a vegan, so no.
- Actually, I'm a butcher box customer.
I've been a customer for an extremely long time.
- What do you think butcher box is?
A remix app or a larval?
Larval, oh, I did it wrong.
- Larval, a larval app, my experience with butcher box
is when they first started.
This site was the slowest site I'd ever used in my life.
Like, just crazy, crazy slow.
So I don't know what they were doing.
And at some point, it got a lot better.
That's my only experience.
And I have no idea what the reason is for that.
I'm sure it was user error.
Like, it was like way too slow.
But I don't know.
I have no idea about it.
- So I don't know what it was before it got fast,
but I know today it's a remix app
that talks to a larval backend.
So first of all, like our two frameworks are not like
always competing, right?
They work together really well.
And lots of people to play stuff like that.
So that's the first thing about this whole thing
is that it's like, we have focused on different things
to the point that some people want to put a big line
between it and be like, all right, everything backend
is larval, everything front end is remix.
And then in remix loaders, they're just gonna talk
between the two things, right?
But the other thing that kind of bothers me,
especially in your Tweet Taylor is,
and has nothing to do with you,
this has happened to us since we launched remix,
is that everybody just saw remix, they saw React,
they saw an X in the name just like next,
and they're like, oh, this is like next.
And in your Tweet, you were talking about in next remix,
it seems to mean that there's simply the bare ability
to run code on the server at all
and an advertisement for clerk.
(laughing)
- I love that line.
- It's so good.
Which, so first of all, like when we launched remix
I was like, how do I do off?
And we're like, just make a table and hash the password
and put it in there, like, just give it a shot.
Don't go to clerk, or sure, go use clerk.
And then the second thing was,
next and others are really, really great at the get.
They're not mature for post, put, and delete,
especially when things start getting non-trivial.
So this is like a huge badge of pride for us with remix,
is that we're old school PHP,
I did code igniter in symphony and Kohana,
Kohana was my favorite one, actually.
And then, and I did like just bare bones.
Like, I was setting up line notes,
like setting up IP tables and stuff.
And then lots of real stuff.
So we kind of brought a lot of that to react.
Like we just, just like,
it's like it's this whole community of reactators
that look at react, like all those idiots
that don't even know how the web works.
And we're like, ah, we actually like,
we're in that group with you.
(laughing)
And remix was our attempt to be like,
let's bring HTTP to react.
You can render it on the server.
So remix from the start has had,
we did a convention where you can stick
an extra component where you get your component,
loader, and action.
Loader is what we do when it's a get with the component.
And then action is when we respond with a post.
So we've always supported that stuff.
Mm-hmm.
And it's always been frustrating,
like getting lumped into like,
oh, I bet you just statically generate stuff.
To the point that we kind of purposely
didn't do static rendering,
just like keep that difference very, very clear.
They're like, no, we want you to run a server
and we want to speak HTTP.
Yeah, that makes sense.
I mean, I think like,
I honestly think this entire discussion,
the most interesting part to me is not really the full stack,
the what is full stack stuff.
It's more like, what is the easiest,
I guess you would say ecosystem or platform
for actually shipping a real product, a real business.
Which is really the most,
like the whole thing I'm interested in
because that's why Laravel was built
was so that I could build startups faster
and ship them out of the web and make money.
And I think that's really why Rails was built too.
And it feels like Laravel and Rails
are just more fleshed out in a way
where if you want to sit down as one person
and build an honest to God product that you can ship,
it just feels a lot faster if you're using something like
Rails or Laravel versus like a JavaScript framework
where you sort of have to like reconstruct
a lot of those opinions from scratch.
Which tends to, I think I could be wrong,
tends to mean that like all of the apps look pretty different
in terms of how they're architected and set up
and there's versus like Laravel or Rails
where from app to app there's some pretty good similarities
and understanding of how you do a lot of things
on the backend that a lot of products need.
So I actually find that actually more interesting,
you know, than the sort of like what's full stack,
what's back in, what's front end and all of that.
- So I like I could say all the exact same stuff
but like in reverse where it's like,
I'm interested in, so you're talking about all the stuff.
Like if it's a gradient, right?
A full stack is a gradient and on the,
on this side we've got your database, your mailers,
your queues, all that kind of stuff.
And then like you come over here,
you get to the network, you send HTML and JSON
and then you start sending JavaScript
and then you start building like a pending UI
or an optimistic UI or, you know,
just a really dynamic experience.
I, remix wants to come as far back
as controllers basically.
Then we're like, ah, there's a ton of databases.
You've already got your Rails app.
You've already got your Laravel app.
Like you've got that part done.
This stuff is where we're trying to push
the ceiling of a user experience.
You know, that's where we've approached this is it's like,
how do you build that really, really dynamic experience
and bend the, bend the trade-offs of like,
how much you do on the server for that UI
and how much you do on the backend?
I asked for a few Laravel apps just to go and like click around
in the network and look in the browser
and see if I could kind of reverse engineer
how it was working.
But all of the sites that people sent me were react
and view and stuff.
But I understand that Laravel has stuff to do
in the browser.
So like I'm more familiar with Rails with like Turbo
and Hotwire and Pjax a long time ago.
So what does Laravel have?
Like I want to make a combo box, right?
I want to do a type ahead and I want to search
my user table and drop something in there.
What is there in Laravel for that?
- So I'll kind of back up a little bit
and kind of explain how Laravel got to where it is today
and how it's different than something like Rails
because I think it's mainly differences
between like me and DHH.
You know when Laravel first came out,
it was just straight up PHP rendered templates
sent to the client just like ERB templates in Rails
or something.
That was like 2010, 2011.
I actually got really into Vue.js around 2015, 2016.
And I think this is one of the key differences
between us and Rails is that it seems like DHH
is like very anti-JavaScript at all.
You know, just wants to do as minimal JavaScript as possible
whereas we've actually always been pretty open minded
about different kinds of frontends
that are paired with Laravel.
So eventually this library called inertia.js was written
that basically lets you tie a React, a Vue, a Svelte frontend
to your Laravel backends within like a monolithic Laravel app
that's all in the same GitHub repo, for example.
And so what it looks like actually is
all of the routing is handled by Laravel.
So you hit a controller and then you return
in a nursery response that corresponds to like a React page
or component and you actually pass the props and data
from the server side controller to the Vue react page
and it's all hydrated in.
You know, I don't actually know exactly how inertia works
because I didn't write it.
And then once you're, once that renders, you know,
like as far as like a combo box or whatever,
you could use whatever React or Vue
component library you'd like.
So if you like, you know, Shad CN or the new catalyst stuff
from tailwind or whatever, you could just drop that in.
And then to hook it up to the back end, you know,
it's just a matter of, you know, I guess just making either,
you know, fetch requests to the back end
or inertia has their own kind of built-in mechanisms
for pulling data as well.
But once you're on the front end, you know,
you can kind of use whatever you want.
So I would actually say, honestly, I wouldn't be surprised
at this point of 50% of Laravel apps, new ones are built
with like a Vue or React front end.
And maybe the other 50% or something like Laravel Livewire,
which is basically like our version of Elixir's,
or Phoenix's live view or it's a little bit different
than Hotwire, I wouldn't fully compare it to that.
But so I think that's kind of the current state, you know,
a front end in Laravel.
- So I'm looking at the inertia website.
So when I say return, inertia render users,
or if I'm doing like a combo box.
So is this is just passing data to the front end?
Or is it like rendering that React component
and sending HTML like of the component?
- Yeah, so I mean, I know they have a server,
there's a server-side rendering part of it you can run,
but let's say you're not doing that.
It actually just sends like JSON data to the front end,
which is then hydrated into the, you know,
the Vue or React components.
But I mean, inertia is kind of like a wire protocol.
You almost might think of it as something like that
that ties together these different front ends
with Laravel on the back end.
But again, I'm not really the expert to talk to
on how it works, but just that a large percentage
of Laravel apps are written this way now.
- Okay, that's a pretty important part for me
coming out from front end is that I want it
to actually send the HTML for that combo box.
I don't want just like a div that's empty that then,
okay, JavaScript showed up.
I got like a spinner or I get layout shift
or I got like, or JavaScript hasn't loaded yet
and they like submit a quick little logarithm.
- No, it's not like that at all.
So it's not sending HTML of all your React components.
- I just know there's no layout shift,
there's no loading, there's no weird stuff like that.
- So that would require a node process though
on the back end somewhere.
- Yeah, yep, correct.
- Okay, so inertia.js, if you want to get HTML rendering
of your front end, you're gonna plug in
some kind of node React request handler.
- There's a console command like artisan inertia colon SSR
which starts off like a node process
that does server-side rendering and all of that.
And then it all just like works automatically.
You still return the same thing from your controller
and inertia will handle like rendering that
using that node process.
- That's interesting.
- Yeah, it's probably like Astro in a lot of ways
where it's just doing the rendering part
but the actual framework doesn't matter.
- On Forge, we actually don't even use
the server-side rendering
because it all works fine actually without that.
If you don't care about kind of not sending HTML
to the client like fully rendered.
So I have a personal gripe with what happened in my career.
- You don't have a Lambo?
- Well, I should sell that guitar
and then we'll get like a really old 82
or something that barely works.
I always felt like a full stack developer.
I liked, I liked, like I told it before,
I even enjoyed setting up IP tables on my line-out VPS.
I ran a website from my office on like an old iMac
for a while but I also care a whole lot
about the user experience.
And in fact, I probably geek out a little bit more
about the buttons and the styles
and the like stripes checkout button
where like the little word inside the button
is animating in with the spinner
and then like it animates out, right?
Like that kind of stuff is so much fun to me.
I ended up at a startup a long time ago
and because I was super interested
in building a great user experience,
I just kind of got pushed more and more
and more and more away from the server.
And this happened across the whole industry
where you end up with these two teams eventually.
You got the backend team and you got the front end team
and you click going to lunch with some of your friends
'cause you just go to lunch with the front end team
and apps started to get really crappy.
Loading spinners, content shift, like there's just a mess.
And then I need to take no offense to designers
but like a lot of designers started to write
a little bit more code too without,
this is going to sound totally wrong or rude
but like not as much programming experience
and a lot more just slap a thing together
because it looks great.
And I'm one of those people too.
So how dare you, Brian, how dare you?
Someone who has been quietly canceled over stuff
I didn't do, I'm very careful now.
Anyway, so I hated that split.
The architecture you're describing continues
to I think create that kind of a split.
And I think the best user experiences are built
by people who like can cross over that line really well.
And when it's like, oh, inertia is going to render
the React app for you.
So put all the weirdo front end people over there
and all of us real programmers who have CS degrees
or whatever and talk to databases, we're going to go do this.
And I hate that split both on a personal level
and I think it's made websites a lot worse.
Like I should not log into my bank
and it's making a bunch of fetches to some JSON endpoint
and like bouncing spinners all over the place.
You know, do you feel that at all or?
You know, I don't know.
I think the Laravel ecosystem is sort of unique
where most of the developers building Laravel apps
I think would truly consider themselves full stack developers
mainly just because of the historical context
of Laravel being geared towards like bootstrappers,
people that want to launch things
and kind of have to do everything themselves, you know?
Obviously it's been adopted into larger organizations
and enterprises and stuff, but just the vibe
of Laravel has always been a toolkit for launching a product
is quickly and efficiently and as high quality as possible.
So most developers kind of know view.
They may not be as good as like someone
that's just a hardcore front end developer full time
but they're serviceable, you know,
and view or react or something else.
- I think that's probably how most people would think
of themselves in Laravel.
- Yeah.
- Something else I think kind of interesting to discuss.
I think DAX may have tweeted this is, you know,
we mentioned that tools like Next and Remix
kind of stop at that controller level
and there's not a lot of like opinions or conventions
beyond that as far as, you know, user roles,
what database to talk to, how you're going to send email,
how you're going to do background work.
And I think it's the one brought up on Twitter.
It's not for like lack of trying.
Like people have tried to build those kinds of tools
for JavaScript before and they just have never seemed
to achieve any sort of critical mass.
And why do we think that it is, you know, like,
is it just a cultural thing within JavaScript
that it's just seen as better to like kind of roll
your own way of doing things or what is it?
- I got two thoughts on that.
I went for a run this morning so I gathered all my thoughts.
I got like a whole outline in my head.
The first is, and I've talked to Adam about this,
there is no JavaScript community, like that doesn't exist.
JavaScript is this island because of the browser
where every other community comes
and just has a battle royale, right?
It's like it's Fortnite for developers.
And so it's a lot of people are like,
oh, how come the JavaScript community hasn't ever landed
on whatever?
It's like, well, 'cause I'm a real, I'm a, I'm Ruby.
Like, Remix comes from Ruby and Ember and PHP,
Laravel people come in, that's Laravel coming
into JavaScript and then someone's really interested
in the front end and they start doing more of the React stuff
and then maybe they start getting interested
and then you start pointing at them like,
oh, that developer is in the JavaScript ecosystem.
It's like, no, no, no, they came from Laravel.
So that's my first thing is it's like,
it's just a big battle royale on the island of the browser.
And so, we're all coming at it from different angles.
I think one is kind of forming,
but I don't think there is one.
So it's a lot easier for Laravel to build a community
and PHP where everyone can look at Taylor
and be like, yeah, we trust him or look at DHH
and be like, yeah, we trust him.
We're gonna do this.
You get to JavaScript and it's like,
which Ryan are you gonna listen to?
The second thing is kind of what I was talking about
before, how the industry has ended up
with the split of backend and front end
and like this jam stack wall in front of it
that kind of showed up or in the case of Laravel,
you got inertia that it's a great scene between that,
but like you're either writing PHP
or you're writing React or Vue,
but it isn't all Laravel, right?
There's something that connects it
and so it's very easy to split those two things up.
And so because we have that split,
you can't look at Laravel and Rails
and JavaScript frameworks in like a snapshot
in time of like right now,
you have to take it all in context and be like, okay,
back when Rails was created,
I don't even know when that was.
I felt like I was a little kid.
I don't even know if I had any kids yet
and my daughter's almost 17.
Everyone was pretty much issues in MySQL
or I don't know how to pronounce that.
I'm a front end developer.
And so it's like, yeah, we can build an arm on that
and everyone can agree.
Today, there's eight million databases.
So if you kind of take the context of like, okay,
in what environment were these JavaScript
full stack frameworks created,
people already have their 15 year old Rails app.
And we got this split, right?
So that's the way the world looks today.
There's a split of front end and back end.
And so if people are like, you know what,
we need to get back to server rendering this stuff.
You don't go back over to Rails and start doing that
'cause then you're gonna lose all the combo boxes
and all of the great UX that you did in React.
You gotta figure out how to bridge that gap differently.
And so React apps are not looking for a database.
Maybe an indie developer who's like,
oh, I wanna start my app with React like they would be.
But for the most part, the current state
of web development is we've got these Rails apps,
these PHP apps, they already have everything they need
on the back end.
And so the React frameworks just need to cross that gap
and then get them there and then it's like, okay,
now go talk to your Rails app.
That's another reason why nothing ever really like sticks
in the JavaScript community
because they've already got the backend over there.
- So Ryan, what about you?
Like a new project, you're building a new repax app
or React router seven or whatever.
Like what do you like to use for mailers
and databases and queues?
And like, is it all kind of patched together?
Is there a go-to thing that you use?
- My full-time job is work on a framework.
- Yeah, maybe a better question is like,
what do you prescribe?
Like if a remix user asks you like,
is there a recommended thing for all those things?
Or is it just sort of like,
that is the stance of most JavaScript front-end frameworks
is you get to choose?
- Yeah, well, my first question to somebody,
do you already have infrastructure?
Like, do you already have the Rails app?
Do you already have the Laravel app?
Do you already have that stuff?
And if they do, it's like,
just deploy them on the same server
and talk to them through HTTP and tell it to send an email
for you or queue a job or something, right?
But then from there, I think it's like,
well, go look at, where do you intend to host?
Are you hosting on CloudFlare?
Are you hosting on Bursale?
Are you hosting on Netlify on AWS?
Especially AWS, they have everything you need there, right?
And so it's like, well, use Cognito,
use, I don't even know what they're all,
use DynamoDB, like use the platform that you're on.
- Yeah, the infrastructure thing is interesting.
I think Bax, you need to talk about something here,
I don't know, the timeline of like,
how these things all evolved
and how infrastructure has changed in the last five years.
- Yeah, yeah, so I think we, just from working on SST,
I think we come across a portion of the community
that's maybe not as visible,
which is people building back ends with JavaScript.
So I think whenever we talk about
people building JavaScript stacks,
we always start with remakes and XJS,
like just the front end portion of it.
But there are like, there is like a backend community
that builds back ends in JavaScript.
And they might not even,
and all these people don't know front end,
like they're not even front end developers
'cause if there is a split there.
So the question is, why do these people even exist?
Like, why are they choosing to use jobs that are on the backend?
The majority of them do not like JavaScript.
Like, that's not like their first pick.
They didn't start in JavaScript.
They come from other environments.
Myself personally, prior to,
for me doing jobs on the backend started three years ago.
Prior to that was doing Elixir.
Prior to that was doing Go.
Prior to that was doing C#.
So what like made me end up in a language
that I don't even like that much on the backend?
It's specifically how infrastructure evolved.
I think there's a portion of people,
like not everyone has to buy into this,
but there are a portion of people
that understand that if you commit to an environment,
whether that's AWS or CloudFlare
and you like do things exactly the way they want you to,
there's a bunch of benefits from doing that.
Like, I haven't used DataDog
or like had a monitoring service in years
because I use like extremely managed services
that scale themselves, model themselves, run themselves.
- A.J.'s and shambles.
- Well, it's our friend A.J. works at DataDog.
- To be fair, I did sign up for DataDog recently
because it's the SSH app, that needed.
- He's backing up.
- That needed monitoring.
- But, mine is that one, everything I've built in the past,
you know, three or four years just did not need
the usual babysitting that I normally have to do.
And if you wanna make that trade off,
these Cloud providers pretty much ask you to do JavaScript.
That's just kind of the reality of it.
Like, you can do other things, of course, on AWS.
You can write other languages,
but the support for certain things just isn't there
to the level it is in JavaScript.
And if you take something like CloudFlare,
it's even more extreme, right?
Like, you literally can't do anything else.
This is all a JavaScript native.
And they kind of, they gave this decision to you
where if you accept these, like, pretty hardcore constraints,
we can do all this stuff for you
that you pretty much can't find anywhere else, right?
So most of the backend community is reluctantly
using JavaScript because they're committing themselves
to this other thing.
And it's not that everyone has to, like, do that.
And it's definitely the way everyone has to go,
but there are just tangible trade-offs and benefits
from doing that.
So the needs of this group of people
is quite different than just cloning,
like, what Rails, Phoenix, Laravel has,
because a lot of the dynamics there are,
we create this really nice bubble for you to live in.
And pretty much wherever you want to deploy,
we'll give you a way to do that through adapters
or whatever, like, you kind of just live
in the Laravel bubble and you have to worry too much
about where it eventually ends up going.
Whereas this is the opposite setup.
If I wanted something like that in JavaScript,
like, I just wouldn't, right?
If I wanted something that was, like,
a nice, full-featured, like, agnostic environment,
I would just go back to using Elixir or whatever else.
So I think a lot of these frameworks are just kind of,
like, one-to-one copy.
And I'm not, like, talking down in the middle,
like, there's Adonis and there's, like,
newer work with Redwood that are trying to hit
in that direction.
I just don't think the market is there
'cause no one is like, I absolutely love JavaScript.
I'm gonna write jobs in the backend no matter what.
I just want, like, a full framework for it.
That's at least my perspective on why I'm here
and why a lot of the people that we, you know,
work with are doing jobs in the backend at all.
- Are you saying there's no JavaScript community?
(laughing)
- Yeah, I mean, I agree with you.
It's like, we're all coming from something else
for the most part.
I think there is, like, what gets confused is,
I do agree with Taylor that there is a portion
of these, like, indie hacker, indie maker-type people
that are trying to do that type of thing
in the JavaScript world.
And it's like, you can't start from,
I'm, like, I'm definitely gonna build a React app
and then, like, then I'm gonna figure out
everything on the backend.
Like, that's gonna be a tough situation
and you either have to do, like, what me and Adam
are doing to commit to infrastructure
or pick one of these other options in different languages
that are really geared towards that.
Like, that just doesn't, there's not really a market
for that in the JavaScript space, like, that's how I feel.
- Yeah, that's interesting.
I mean, yeah, I mean, I think that's kind of, like,
the summary of where I've been at the past couple of years.
Like, one of the people I talked to the most
that I guess would be adjacent to the JavaScript ecosystem
is Adam Wavin from Tailwind,
who started in the Laravel ecosystem.
You know, and when we were looking at tools like Next.js
or whatever else, it was just very hard for us to imagine
how we would build something like, I don't know,
any sort of, like, robust web app.
It could be, like, Laravel Forge, something like Basecamp,
something like Linear, using, like, only these tools
and those alone.
But I guess if it's like, sort of accepted
that, like, of course you wouldn't do that,
you would just call some Rails or PHP backend
to do a lot of the, like, the back-and-heavy lifting
than fine.
- Or what your host provides, yeah.
- Yeah.
But it just felt like a lot of, some of the messaging,
I guess, was like, yeah, I guess just, like,
almost like, Next versus Laravel.
Like, it's like a real alternative to that robust,
full-stack experience when, you know, I don't know,
it just didn't feel that way.
So we were, like, perpetually confused of, like,
how would we ever ship a product like this?
But maybe we're just, like, kind of coming at it
from the wrong angle, I'm not sure.
- So I will say, a big portion of what we do
is help companies ship the front-end portion of it.
Very few of them is that thing, their whole app.
They have, like, a completely separate backend
that does typical backend things.
They're also written in JavaScript,
but to me, at least right now,
and I don't see why this really changed.
Like, I don't see many projects,
even early stage ones that are just, yeah,
just this, my whole system, it just lives in this.
Next JS app.
- But on Twitter, you would think,
it seems like Next JS is all you need.
Like, you're good.
I mean, that's what VersaO would kind of make you think.
- I do think it comes across that way, you know,
like, is VersaO written with Next JS?
Like, I don't know, like, the whole app, you know,
it seems unlikely, you know,
I don't know that the whole, like, deployment pipeline
is in Next JS app.
- It's up to, like, Kubernetes and stuff, right?
- Yeah.
- Guys, I'm right here.
(laughing)
- Oh, yeah, sorry, we have an ambassador
from the JavaScript framework,
but you're not even a framework anymore.
You're just like a library, right?
- There's differences or something.
- We're talking about Next JS.
Like, saying over here.
Oh, yeah, yeah, no, that's a good point, yeah.
- In the beginning, Remix is the Next JS,
and here we are talking about Next JS.
(laughing)
And Next is in TypeScript, it's not even Next JS,
it's Next TS.
- I don't think--
(laughing)
- I don't think Remix is as big a fender as Next
in that regard.
Like, I don't--
- That's what I was gonna ask.
Like, Taylor, have you felt anything
from the Remix community that's like,
oh, we can totally, we're the whole stack for you.
- No, I don't really get those vibes.
I think that mainly seems to come from, like,
Twitter is such like a weird place,
disconnected from reality.
But like, the vibes I get are that like,
all you need is Next, and it's mainly from that community.
- Yeah.
- I don't know, so that's the main vibe I get.
Dax, like, on the back end JavaScript,
like, what's kind of the thing there these days?
Like, is it Express JS, or is it something,
like, what are they calling?
- I was gonna say, it's like Cloudflare,
you put a bunch of files in a folder,
and they call 'em, right?
Like, you don't really--
- There isn't, there's a spectrum here.
So if you're like, infrastructure heavy, right?
So let's take AWS, you use something called API Gateway,
which is a router that's like a service.
So you're not like, you don't need something to route
in your application level to handle the infrastructure level.
It's a bunch of benefits from that.
I actually don't like that much,
'cause I don't like that specific service.
- And does that route to like a Lambda
that's running some JavaScript?
- Yes, one or many Lambdas,
you can also tell it, here's the schema that I expect,
and it'll do validation before it even hits your code.
So obviously, you're paying less for that.
It's written in a really efficient language.
There's a bunch of benefits to doing that stuff.
Again, I personally don't love that,
but there is a section in the AWS community
that like really takes advantage of those primitives.
- It goes even further, right, Dax?
Like the more extreme example would be like step functions
where you're not even writing loops anymore or like--
- Traditional code, yeah.
- Yeah, back off mechanisms.
All this stuff is like in the infrastructure,
and you're writing these tiny little,
if you're even writing any JavaScript,
you're writing these tiny little functions
that do single purpose stuff.
So there's like this very extreme case
where people think you should take advantage
of the extremities of AWS.
- It's like AWS becomes your programming language
in a lot of ways.
Like I said, I don't know if that,
there are a lot of companies that are super into that model
and they built big complex things with it
and then they make it work.
It just doesn't click for me personally
'cause I like programming languages
and I don't wanna get away from them so much.
Then you take something like Cloudflare,
which is a little bit kind of in between.
They don't provide you as much,
and you're still running like your application codes
doing the routing.
And there you have some options like HONO,
which is like, it's very much like express,
but just runs across all these different places
and takes advantage of the infrastructure-specific details
that exist there.
But yeah, beyond that,
you just don't need as much application stuff.
Like wherever you end up falling on this spectrum,
you just don't need it.
If the services are designed, well,
and you wanna use it.
- Ignoring the marketing that feels one way or another
from Versailles and Next,
where we're coming from remixes,
it's like we recognize that there is this
different way to deploy apps
and that there are these infrastructure companies now
that have all of this stuff for you.
So it's like, we're not gonna show up and be like,
hey, guess what?
Yeah, deploy this to...
I forgot what the name is.
Not Heroku, the other one.
A digital ocean droplet like that's how remix works.
It's a node process.
If we were just a node process,
then yeah, we could do a whole bunch of the,
we could do a bunch more abstraction for people,
but we were born in a different era
where all this infrastructure exists
and people's own personal infrastructure also exists.
So it's definitely different target audiences
that I think we're going for.
- Yeah, and I think a lot of this stuff,
I think people look at it externally
and it feels like it should be able to be replicated,
but since the other day,
where there's brief moments of time
and there's like comes down to like singular individuals
seeing something and executing it on it well.
And I think a lot of what we're seeing with Laravel today
is a result of some decisions you made 10 years ago
that were correct that are just panning out now, right?
So it's really hard to like exactly recreate it
'cause there's just sort of brief moments
where everything aligns and there's the right environment,
there's a right appetite for something,
there's the right opportunity to the right people leading it.
Yeah, these things are kind of like miracles to me
when they actually pan out.
So it's hard to recreate.
- Dude, in Laravel, oh my gosh, dude,
I have so much respect for what you've done, Taylor.
When we started Remix, it was like,
VCs wanted us to be versatile.
Everyone was trying to give us money
'cause like, oh, we missed out on them,
so maybe we can give it to these guys.
We didn't really wanna do that.
We were probably going to do something
a lot more like what you did.
I love when you go to Laravel and it's like community
and you click and it's like, here's 18 things right here
that are gonna like solve the problems
that your app actually needs to solve.
That's before we open source and stuff.
That's kind of what I was imagining we would do.
So huge respect for what you've done.
I have a little bit different topic I wanna bring up
if everybody is ready to move on from this.
- Yeah, let's do it.
- I think JavaScript frameworks are the only ones
in position to be the fullest stack.
- Keep going. - Interesting.
(laughing)
- I think I agree, but I'll let you continue.
- Like we talked about before,
there's this line between like,
I'm writing the PHP and now I'm writing
the JavaScript side of the app, right?
React server components that we've been excited about
the whole time, but also critical of as we're doing it
because a lot of what React is doing
is creeping into the remix problem space,
which we're fine now.
Anyway, nobody cares about the React stuff in here.
But what it does, it's dissolving the network, right?
You got your back end code,
you got your front end code
and then there's like a network in between there.
Prime example of this is if you're always rendering
on the server, the hey calendar.
If you go to the hey calendar,
I don't know if any of you've played with it,
but there's so much-- - It is slow.
- In every single user interaction.
- Yeah, it's not good.
- It's not good, inertia is super cool
because it lets you render that stuff on the server.
But so we'll go back like a step even farther back
that I think isn't good with Rails.
And it's like the calendar pop up
is was the first thing I noticed.
When you click on a day to like get the calendar pop up,
there's latency there because they gotta go to the server,
render the HTML and then send it back, right?
And then we drag events back and forth.
You drag it, let go, and then it pops back
exactly where it was.
And then after the network's done,
it shows up over in the new spot.
So these problems, you have to render in the browser, right?
So you've got to have a JavaScript template somewhere
that when you click the button,
you can just tell the browser render this thing.
We used to like send hidden divs
and like show like pop them up and stuff.
Like I think everyone is kind of beyond that phase of it
with all the problems that it caused.
And so that movement of like, okay,
this interaction, the latency's bad.
We need to render this in the browser.
With inertia and Laravel and React,
you're gonna move that pop up from PHP over to React, right?
You know, you're gonna cross that gap
and now the person in charge of that
is the guy who went to eat at McDonald's for lunch
instead of the guy who went over to wherever else, right?
But it's now a different team in charge of that template.
Or just in your own mind, you're an individual.
- I would like to believe
if I could get DHH to try inertia,
he would just delete Hotwire.
(all laughing)
Because I think I do think like he's,
it's holding Rails back.
And I loved DHH is my hero.
And I hate to say it pained me to say this,
but it's holding Rails back and you can,
hey, calendar is a perfect example of how
and why it's holding Rails back.
- It's an amazing product.
The team there is so good at building great products.
But the UX, it seriously feels like I woke up in 2010
and it's like, what is this?
Like this is crap, like go use linear
and you'll see what is possible now.
And they're just still, anyway.
It's, I feel the same way.
- Dax just perked up, linear mention.
- I'm glad someone else brought it up and down.
(all laughing)
- I feel like it's like, I don't know.
Yeah, it hurts me.
It's like Michael Jordan, when he played for the Wizards,
like it's just, I don't know.
(all laughing)
It's just, I don't know, it's not good.
And if I could get him on inertia,
I just feel like he would see the light, you know?
- Yeah, so I think inertia is a great step
in the right direction.
But you still have to like,
you still have to constantly make this decision
of like, is this a thing that I do in Laravel,
in a PHP template or is this a thing
that I move over to the JavaScript app, right?
And that, for an individual, that is a lot of friction.
And for a team, that's enormous friction to the point
where like, they might not even deploy these things together.
How is someone, a designer going to be like,
"Hey, this interaction sucks, let's fix it."
And it's like, okay, let's get two product managers
in the room and let's get the team lead of each of these
and let's figure out how to move this template
from PHP over to JavaScript, right?
And so, what React, what we've been doing with Remix
and now what React can do on its own,
I think is so interesting with the use client directive
for a React component.
You can have that calendar pop up
and it's just rendered on the server
and you can click on click, go fetch that RSC stream
and then hand it back to React and it'll render it.
And it's a really easy little one-line thing to do
and you're keeping rendering on the server.
And then you're like, you know what?
This interaction sucks, let's get rid of the latency
and let's move the template to the browser.
You literally just put use client
at the top of that thing of the module.
That's it.
And now that is part of the JavaScript bundles
and then when you click, you just say
set state open true or whatever, right?
And now boom, it's there.
That's what I mean by like, we're dissolving the network
in a way that I don't think you can do
with any other framework than a JavaScript framework
because your template never has to really change.
You just put use client at the top
and you can teleport it over the network now,
which I think is super interesting.
So that's what I think all of us weirdos
over in this React world are doing.
I know that it's really easy to look at from the outside
and be like, what kind of Rube Goldberg machine
are those weirdos making?
But like, that's it.
I want that hate calendar pop up
to be rendered in the browser,
drop a use client at the top.
That's it.
I think it's super compelling.
And with that, thanks for coming to another episode
of tomorrow with them.
(laughing)
- When do you think like, I mean,
JavaScript's been around a long time.
When will it, if ever have sort of the robust full stack
product building tool to match something
like Rails from 2006?
- So this is what I think is, yeah.
So I think that this is where I get really excited
'cause I'm like, okay, all of us weirdos in React.
We're like, we're solving this really, really weird
difficult problem of dissolving the network
that I think a lot of other people are like,
ah, whatever, it doesn't matter.
Just like move it over through inertia,
put it over in React app.
Like just keep doing that.
But we're like obsessed with this.
Like, no, we're going to fix,
we're gonna change this thing.
Once we get that done,
once we're done just hyper focusing on this,
like crossing that network gap,
we've been doing delayed jobs and mailers
and databases for decades now.
So I think, I think in the next few years
in the React ecosystem, you're gonna see an explosion
of amazingly composable backend functionality
that is just so easy to add to an app.
Like easier than Rails or Laravel
or any other non-JavaScript thing.
We're not there yet 'cause we're just so hyper focused
on this one problem.
But I think we're gonna be able to backfill that stuff
really fast and they'll be platform specific.
It'll be like, this is for SST and AWS or CloudFlare
or your own node process or Prisma,
Mailgun, whatever, right?
We got that kind of stuff.
I think it'll fill in quickly.
- I think the other dynamic that is annoying
but does have a big impact is jobs
we did have a reset with TypeScript.
I know like it's just effectively a linter
at the end of the day, but it did change a lot of things
and there's so many versions of TypeScript
before it became what's concerned modern TypeScript.
I would say 4.0 plus is when it was like,
okay, this is like, now we get it now.
But when I say we get it, it also took a couple years
for people to really get it and for libraries
to pop up really taking advantage of TypeScript correctly
so that the end user isn't bogged down
by all the concepts of types and everything.
And I think in the past year, I feel like
there's finally like enough understanding around these things
that we're seeing libraries and tools come out
that properly do stuff.
So this is like a big reset.
There's also a whole like stupid things
like the CJSSM thing.
Like there's a lot of like dumb,
like historical bad decisions problems
that the ecosystem is just saddled with.
And these are all just headwinds that do exist.
And there's like a way out of it,
but that kind of explains why it seems like
it's taking forever.
- Makes sense.
But before we move on past that one,
I guess everything you said, Ryan,
about you guys all obsessing about
the dissolving the network and all that stuff,
once you figure that out and you guys like,
you crack the code and it's all done,
could Laravel just like use that?
Like instead of inertia, could there be a third option
where like Laravel bolts on all this decade
of backend stuff and says,
well, now we're gonna use that cool thing
on the network dissolving thing.
- And that will always be a part of the React world
or the front end jobs for framework world.
Like they're like butcher box,
they're not gonna go back to Shopify.
We've got a five million line React app.
And I don't know, it's like 15 million line rails app behind it.
No one's gonna move that to node.
(laughing)
That is what it does for a very, very long time.
- Yeah, most backends are not
and it's gonna be the case forever.
- But yeah, I think what you'll see is
you'll get rid of all the templates
from that backend framework.
Like you're not gonna do any rendering with that thing.
There's just gonna be in your server components,
you're just gonna be talking either through the local network
or in some cases you'll go straight to the database.
Oh, but yeah, it's designed for that, I think, Adam,
to, that's why we don't prescribe the backend stuff
'cause it's like we wanna work with your existing backend.
- You know that Blitz.js thing, do you all remember that?
- Yeah.
- I mean, I guess the website is still up.
Do you think, I mean, that's an example of someone
that tried to sort of bring this missing full stack toolkit
or whatever, in their words, to a next JS?
And do you think that didn't really take off
kind of going back to what you said, Dax, about like,
people just don't, there's just not a market
for people looking for this, like in JavaScript.
- Yeah, I think there's, there's just, again,
with all these things, there's so many variables,
like time, place, people, all of it.
Blitz, let's say, let's take for granted that they did want
to, like people did want it and there was value.
And I know a lot of people did use it.
But what hurt them a lot was next JS evolved really rapidly
and they were building on top of a framework
that they didn't really control or like, you know,
have influence on and they were constantly chasing
breaking stuff and they had to like tap into next
in ways that I imagine the next developers don't tear out,
actually.
- Oh yeah, did they?
- Yeah, he eventually forked it
and that'll kill any communities, like trust in it, right?
Like, oh, you forked next?
All right, never mind.
- Yeah, exactly.
- I mean, we get that with Remix where it's like,
oh, next has a couple of people
from the React core team working on it.
Therefore, it's the only one that you should use.
- It's more pure.
Yeah, so it's just, it's really hard in this space to,
like, I think what's in all these other spaces,
someone dominant kind of emerged,
some dominant framework, something,
they reach a level of dominance.
What really kills you is if you bet on something
that fails to reach that.
Because if a bunch of people use Laravel
and Laravel didn't become as big as it is today,
you're in like a horrible place.
And I think in the JavaScript space,
it's like, because of what Ryan said,
there's so many different communities in it.
It's really hard to achieve deep dominance.
It's really hard to like deliver something great
when you don't really have full attention
of everyone in this space.
And the other thing with Blitz is it's very geared
towards people trying to have,
next day has to be their whole system,
which, you know, they're just, it's tough.
So that's like a very small market.
And there's existing backend,
there's people that don't want to write
jobs on the backend, all kinds of reasons.
But I actually think everyone would be happy with this future
where if Remix solves this really nicely,
this whole problem of get the data, render something,
deliver it to the end user,
but then have a really snappy feel on the app
and you actually use it.
And everyone can just use that, like Laravel can use it,
Phoenix can use it, like everyone can just tap into that.
That kind of nicely splits the responsibilities, right?
Where you guys don't have to try to resolve that,
you can just use it,
which I guess is like the idea behind inertia to begin with.
Like we're not trying to build the competitor react,
we can just tap into everything that they do.
- Yeah, the difference is probably that the requests
come to Remix at that point.
And then Remix calls out to Laravel to get the data,
instead of Laravel handing the requests
and then calling out to node to render, right?
- Yeah, right.
- Yeah, that would be pretty sweet.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I mean, it would work with inertia too.
I would imagine anyway, I'd be surprised if it didn't.
- Taylor, what do you want to see
from the Remix community on Twitter?
- I think we need to do better on, at least on our side,
we've made small attempts at this with Next,
but we should probably look at Remix too,
of like how to best pair these technologies, you know?
Whether that be, I know this is kind of on trend right now,
but starter kit, starter kit for, you know,
because when you said you've got someone pairing
a Laravel back in an a Remix front,
and I was just actually very curious to see
like how that all works together,
how the authentication works,
how they talk to each other, how they structure all that,
because I actually don't have a great idea
in my head of what that looks like,
just 'cause I'm not a super expert, you know,
front end developer.
I think we just need to do better about educating people.
- They're an awesome team.
I can put you in contact with them,
and I'm sure they would love to chat with you about it.
I worked with them,
I was having like bi-weekly meetings with them
as they were moving over to Remix for a little while.
Yeah, though, they would love to talk to you, I'm sure.
- Yeah, because like I said, I've always been very,
I like JavaScript fine, I like view, I like React,
so I would actually like to flesh out our just kind of
documentation and educational material
about how to pair some of these frameworks like Remix
with Laravel in the most sensible and like productive way,
'cause I haven't seen a lot of that out there.
- Yeah, yeah, that'd be cool.
- The other thing is any backend can return
like an RSE stream hypothetically, right?
Like technically you could have that stream coming
from a Laravel application, I don't know if it makes sense,
but my understanding is it's possible.
- So yeah, yeah, so that's actually interesting, right?
Are you kind of talking about like,
I wrote a Laravel component, it's in PHP.
Like I didn't write any JavaScript,
I wanna build this whole thing with PHP,
send some sort of PHP thing through the RSE wire format
and then dump it in the page.
So the trick there is how do you turn your PHP module
into a JavaScript module for the browser, right?
Because if you're gonna do the proverbial counter button,
right, and you're gonna click that thing
and the count's gonna go up and it's 100% just in the browser
or the pop up on the hey calendar,
how do you convert that PHP template to a JavaScript template?
So I don't know if that's Wasm
or it fits a crazy PHP transform.
- Everyone says Wasm everything.
Wasm was supposed to fix every problem for the last 10 years
and it's the only thing about using it nowadays.
- But reason ML, did you guys ever look at--
- I love reason.
- Yeah, so Jordan Wock made React
and then he went and made Reason ML
and it compiled down to React components.
So totally different language.
So I mean, it should be possible,
but that would be the trick.
And maybe that's what you're asking more earlier, Adam,
of like, can't you just use RSC in Laravel?
Yeah, if you build a thing that can,
if you build an API and PHP of like,
here's what a component looks like
and then you build some sort of compiler
that can turn that into a JavaScript module
that then targets the React runtimes like you stayed
and use effect and all that kind of stuff,
you could totally do that.
That'd be super cool.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
I like how throughout this entire discussion,
we just sort of taken for granted the PHP's a serious language
that people should be using.
- We're just funny.
(laughing)
- We never stopped even questioning that
from first principles or anything.
(laughing)
- Is that what you expect?
- Thank you all and appreciate that.
(laughing)
- Michael and I always say that we've just been chasing
that PHP high our whole careers.
- Like math.
- Yeah, when React people are like,
this is like PHP, like we mean that
as endearingly as possible.
(laughing)
- I've definitely heard you, Taylor.
I've heard you like say derogatory things about PHP
and I can tell you've got more to say on that front.
- No, I mean, I like PHP fine.
Like it's not like the prettiest,
most elegant language or whatever, but like it's fine.
I'm only accidentally a PHP developer.
I started as a cobalt and C-sharp developer.
- Me and Adam also.
- Yeah, same.
Well, not cobalt. - Not cobalt.
- C-sharp, no, no, sorry, thank you.
(laughing)
- C-sharp.
- And I just wanted a way to build products faster
and PHP was easy to throw up on a host.
So I just created a framework for doing that
and other people started using it.
- That's interesting.
Oh, that's super interesting.
Because that's kind of what me and Dax were getting at
of like, well, today AWS and Cloudflour
are like these whole platforms, right?
So like we're building a framework to take advantage of that
where you're like, I want to like PHP hosting was super easy.
You just throw the files up there
and then the host knew how to do stuff.
And yeah, that's interesting.
- I mean, to be honest though, like,
I feel like even that API gateway story
and that Cloudflour stuff still sounds worse than Rails.
Like, is that better?
Like then just like building a Rails app?
- Oh, the DX is absolutely worse, it's way worse.
Yeah, it's way worse.
- The DX is really bad.
It's immature.
We're at the point right before a DHH was like,
I'm done with this crap.
Like let's make this good.
Like, we're at that point still.
The capabilities are there,
but like piecing all together still totally sucks.
- Yeah.
So what is it unlocking then?
Is it unlocking scale?
Is it, what is it, what is it giving you?
Reliable, it's just reliable or easy to run and scale up?
- It's, I would say it's very low long-term ops.
So I think typically when you were talking about building
something from zero to one, it's not as fast.
You're gonna go a little bit slower.
But the number of surprises you'll run into
week to week, month to month is a lot lower.
You're offloading a ton of stuff that you wouldn't normally do.
Like my team is three people.
We have a ton of products that we run and maintain.
One of them is a full-blown CI services.
Like CI services are notoriously like annoying
and difficult to run.
But if you look at how we designed it,
you would be like, why the hell did you guys build it
in this like really weird way?
It's 'cause we maximize this other property of like,
this is the lowest overhead for us to run.
So yeah, I think it's all about operations
and reducing that.
And like I said, you don't have to buy into that.
And that's not like what everyone,
that's not what everyone's like number one pain is.
But for, let's say to make inside of people,
that's kind of what they care about.
- Yeah, makes sense.
Lowest operational complexity, I guess.
- Yeah.
- Or a pain.
- And I agree that DX right now is not great.
It is like I said, that zero to one,
even just learning which one of these things to use,
like how do I play them together?
It is a long journey and it's way longer than it should be.
But again, I think we're still like kind of early
in that process.
- So this is a slight, I don't know how much longer
we wanna talk, but maybe a slight change of topic.
Something I've thought about is, you know,
when I first started building Laravel,
I feel like the top of the web developer funnel,
it was very common for people to enter
web development through PHP.
It was not definitely not rare, you know,
either through WordPress or some other framework
like Codeignite or like Ryan mentioned.
- Kind of for Bluehost and they're like,
which meant that incoming new developers
to web development inevitably ended up learning things
like SQL, some amount about how databases work,
how sessions work, you know, like all of that stuff,
more back in knowledge.
Whereas, you know, now it feels like the top of funnel
for people coming into web development,
at least again, from my perception on Twitter,
seems to be almost exclusively JavaScript,
typically through something like remix or next
or solid or whatever these other,
what other frameworks are out there.
Do you all feel like that sort of like created
a generation of new developers that is not as familiar
with backend web development as they should be?
And is that a bad thing?
Like, do you feel like most people coming
to web development now know how to write SQL?
Whereas that would be very common to know that,
you know, 10 years ago.
Whereas today, is that the case, do you think?
And is that bad, if not?
- So this is like, this is like what I was saying earlier
where I was like, I feel like sometimes people look at remix
and put it in this lump of like,
those kinds of developers that you're talking about
or this top of that funnel and I'm like,
no, no, no, no, no, we're with you on this.
See, I generally would agree with everything you just said
and remix is honestly kind of, I can't speak for everyone else
who's designed and built it, but for me personally,
it was an answer to that.
Back in, if Elon hadn't deleted my Twitter account,
I could go pull up some old tweets.
When we were about to launch remix,
I started making a bunch of tweets about,
hey, remember HTML forms?
Most of you probably don't even know what these do anymore,
like, and 'cause our whole mutation API
was built around forms for both progressive enhancement
and it's just a good API.
And so I held a whole bunch of tweets
like showing people how forms work
and tons of people don't even know.
So ignoring SQL, they don't even like three, four years ago,
I was arguing with people not arguing and lightning,
it looked like arguing, people that like forms
actually cause a navigation.
Like, there's this one guy where he was just like,
trying to tell me that they don't cause a navigation,
I'm like, dude, put a form in an HTML file
and hit submit and watch the URL, it's gonna change
and then click the back button.
And so, yeah, there's a huge, and I think,
this goes back to where I'm like,
this kind of split happened where it was like,
all right, people who kind of know HTTP in the web
and sessions and cookies and databases
went over to lunch over here
and then they had all the front end people
go to lunch over here and yeah,
this is kind of the funnel now.
And I think that's, I personally think that is.
- I don't understand it at all, I've talked about this.
I don't like, I don't think there's anything more complicated.
In terms of the number of concepts
than like modern front end, I feel like
we should start even simpler.
Like people new to programming should be writing
like little CLI apps and they're just like taking input
and doing something with it and now putting it.
Like I just, to me, I can't think of a worse starting point
in software development than being dropped into like,
there's bundlers and there's TypeScript and EJS and CJS
and whatever, like all that stuff.
I made one out of PJS and it was like,
I feel like it's a lot, right?
Like to like figure all that stuff out.
- When you get an error and you got this discussing stack trace
that's in the middle of the guts of React's render cycles,
not even your code.
- Yeah.
Back when I was at, so I spent a lot of time
consulting prior to my current work
and I felt like a lot of my job was making,
helping people realize like programming could be fun.
'Cause a lot of them were just in these like nightmarish,
entirely front end code bases that just did not,
this weren't designed well and everything was difficult to do.
And anytime you built a feature,
they were just trained to expect
like every single thing to go wrong.
And like nothing can ever really work correctly.
That's kind of their perspective.
And showing them that, oh, like, you know,
it doesn't really have to be like this.
That is like a very common thing.
And I think that might be, it's unfortunate.
I feel very lucky that I got started programming when I did
'cause it feels like the world was simple.
It got more complex with me.
So I just learned like one new concept every couple months,
whereas now it really feels like the entry point is,
is quite difficult.
And maybe everyone always feels this way,
but it really feels kind of crazy right now.
- I think user expectations are a lot different now
than they were 15 years ago too, right?
Like before it was fine when used like,
do you remember Lighthouse, the Rails app
for like issue tracking?
It was just like, it looked like a straight up rail scaffold
with a little bit of extra thoughts on it.
You'd fill out a form, you'd click submit,
the browser would spin and then you'd go to the next page.
And then the other thought is, in the front end we're really,
first of all, the platform's not designed
for what we're trying to build in it, right?
Like it's not designed for apps
and we're trying to build apps in it.
And so that's already kind of a hostile environment.
And we're really on the front end
trying to like, we're pushing the limits of it right now.
So new developers getting dumped into like,
I don't even know, like the,
they're dropped right next to the dynamite
where we're blowing up on mine,
was like, oh yeah, we think that there's gold down there.
Instead of like putting them over
on the monkey bars or something, right?
Where it would be fun.
And so I think, I honestly think a lot of developers
should start with Laravel.
They should start with Rails.
They should start with, without any front end anything,
just do document requests, talk to a database.
Like you can build a product like that.
You don't need super high fidelity user interactions.
And so what I hope, what I hope we're doing
in the React world over here,
and tell you should know in the React world
like it's, there's factions in here
that like are always battling as well.
So like we aren't this big cohesive group.
But in the, right now I'm representing the React nation.
What I hope happens with what we're doing
is that we can actually get back to like,
you can use React in this really simple way, right?
Imagine a React server component framework, a world
where you don't even send any JavaScript.
Everything is just a React component.
It just runs on the server.
You have no use client, you have no use state.
You don't have any fancy stuff like that.
Just forms and actions and data loading from a database.
I think, I think we're right,
we're right up like to that line
and we're just about to cross it to where,
okay, everything can be simple again.
But yeah, we're pushing on that edge right now.
I think we're almost there.
- The one other thing that comes up is,
again, like for the people that are trying to push,
what can we do in the browser?
Like how can we, there's kind of forever been this,
at least for me, how can we make the web feel
as good as a native app?
And there's been people pushing that for a very long time.
There's no way to do that without writing a lot of JavaScript.
Everything from getting accessibility right,
all the little details right.
Now taking advantage of like the browser storage,
that's like critical for building anything
that feels as good as linear.
That just makes you have to write a lot of jobs.
There's like no avoiding that.
Not every app needs to go to that degree.
I think it's productivity apps that people use every day
for their work.
I think all of those should be going to that degree
and I think a lot don't.
But that's maybe a small subset of what everyone works on.
You just can't avoid it.
So again, reluctantly doing this stuff,
not because we enjoy it, but because it's the only way
to kind of deliver a certain experience.
- There is no JavaScript community.
- Right.
- That's what I think of it too.
That's why it all looks like such a mess
is it's like we're trying to build really,
really great user experiences
and that requires a ton of JavaScript.
- I mean, that makes sense.
If everyone was going to build an app like that with Laravel,
they would definitely choose inertia every time.
Like they would never try to do it with PHP
or even with Live Wire.
I think if you're going to try to build something
like as high fidelity as something like a linear
or a real, a good calendar, you know,
like you would always start with inertia.
I don't think any Laravel developer really
would try to do otherwise.
- Have we said it all?
- A little over time.
Any last thoughts anything we didn't get to?
- Rhinas notes from his jog.
- I always have notes, man.
I'm coming to these unprepared.
I got a win.
(both laughing)
No, no, I just, just huge respect for you, Taylor.
I absolutely love what you've done with Laravel.
And I, your target audience,
they should absolutely start with Laravel
instead of a cobbling together,
some crazy back end with remix.
100% I agree with that.
- Yeah.
- And we, like, as a C, we study the Laravel docs,
a ton just to understand everything,
just from like taste to scope to how you communicate things.
So it's been a huge influence on us as well.
Obviously, for the reason I said,
we're not like trying to do exactly the same thing,
but the goals of what you guys have done
and are trying to do, definitely going to appreciate it.
- We should get a definition of full stack.
- Yes, a humble circle.
- I've talked way too much,
so I'm not going to give the definition.
- I'm actually fine saying it just means the ability
to run code on client or server,
which I think honestly qualifies like, you know, remix
and next, and those tools is full stack.
I think like, I'm fine with that as like a definition.
- Are we losing batteries like clav on rails
or something more, yeah, as something beyond that.
It goes deeper, one direction or the other.
- Yeah, and that's kind of why--
- It's kind of like that definition.
- That's kind of why I brought the way it's all started
because it really wasn't about that.
The original thing was like,
this implication that we're about was bloated.
And, you know, there's an explanation for why the goal is there.
- I only responded to that because I saw Theo retweeted it.
And then I knew it was like, it had to be addressed at point.
- He's always like, oh, every single thing.
It's like a little like, oh, Theo involvement, of course.
(laughing)
Oh, hang on, I got one more thing to say.
I have one more thing to say.
A little bit spicy.
My whole impression forever is that,
and Adam, you got at this too.
We're like, the Laravel community is amazing.
They use tailwind and they don't talk about it.
(laughing)
Everyone, it's like, it sounded like Laravel was like Canada.
We're like, everyone is just so nice
and so even Theo and nuanced and like this big kumbaya.
I got some like funny people in my replies
with just a couple of things I said.
And I don't feel like I said anything spicy
'cause I don't like, I have tons of respect for Laravel.
So anyway, I got lots of Laravel fans in my mentions
that were not Canadian.
(laughing)
- In any sense of the term.
- Yeah.
(laughing)
- Oh, you're not better than us.
- Like you get pumped a little bit and it's just as bad
as the JavaScript world.
(laughing)
- No, yeah, that's probably true for sure.
- We're all the same.
- Don't justify it from the worst.
I will acknowledge I think the JavaScript community
is the worst of the worst, but it's the worst.
- It's the worst.
(laughing)
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a agree.
- 100%.
- Well, the JavaScript community,
does it even make sense to think that it would ever be
like unified in the Ruby or the Rails
or like Laravel sense?
Well, that just like never.
- No, I argue more with the JavaScript people.
- Yeah, I argue more with the JavaScript community
than any like any other community.
Like I have more issues with what's happening internally
than anything against some other thing.
So yeah, I just don't think it's gonna happen.
We all come from too many different backgrounds.
- It's the island of the JavaScript browser.
- It's a good metaphor.
It's a deadly island, violent, deadly island.
(laughing)
- And even in the camps we're battling, it's crazy.
- It's hilarious.
(laughing)
- It's good for people that are retired, I think,
that are like kind of retired, I would say.
- Yeah, one day.
- It's not great place to spend if you're early in your career.
Just, it's a great place to waste time.
- All right, full stack.
You can run code in both places.
- There you go.
And Laravel's battery is included.
- Makes sense to me.
- Okay.
Well, thank you both for joining.
- Thanks for coming, guys.
- Yeah, I appreciate it.
- Yeah, fun times.
Thanks for having us.
- That's fun, sorry for having to push it back.
- No worries.
- Have a good time. Well, let's say we're gonna see Taylor
in August officially in Dallas.
We're super excited for that kind of getting planned.
- Why are you guys getting to go to another con?
As total, as part of the coffee thing.
- Oh, okay.
- One's Laracon.
- August 27th and 28th.
- I'll be camping with a bunch of kids.
- Us too.
- Getting.
(laughing)
- I got to come down to like a React conference at some point.
It actually seems pretty lit at these conferences.
I compared to a lot of other dev conferences.
(laughing)
- Yeah, the React mining one especially,
it's like, it's so loosely tied to React.
- Yeah, the React's mining is just like,
it has nothing to do with React.
It's just a big like party.
- Yeah.
- I'm coming to that next year for sure.
- Yes.
- That'll be great.
- I'll be there.
So we'll finally meet, that'll be great.
- Yeah.
The percentage of people that go to React
mine me that don't use React is just increasing
every single year, so we got to keep that going.
(laughing)
- Yeah.
- All right, well, thanks everyone.
You wanna end the recording on it?
- See you guys.
What'd you say next?
You wanna end the recording?
- Oh yeah, yeah, that's a great way to end it.
I'll click the button that ends the recording.
(upbeat music)